README.md, before:

# The Multilingual Quantitative Biologist

This repository contains the source code for the **The Multilingual Quantitative Biologist**.

![cover image](silbiocomp/Graphics/CMEE_Fungus.jpg)

These code was written and tested with R 3.xx and Python 3.xx, though older language versions (including R 2.xx and Python 2.7) should work in most cases.

See [Index.ipynb](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/mhasoba/TheMulQuaBio/blob/master/notebooks/Index.ipynb) for an index of the notebooks available to accompany the text.

## License

### Code
The code in this repository, including all code samples in the notebooks listed above, is released under the [MIT license](LICENSE-CODE). Read more at the [Open Source Initiative](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

### Text
The text content of the book is released under the...

===
## For Co-authors:

The old silbiocomp repo is now here, (the silbiocomp) directory. Please 
make changes and addtions there for now, until the online version, 
(a bunch of cross-linked jupyter nbs) is up and running.

Commit message:

First version with indexed jupyter notebooks for chapters 0 & 1; also reorganized project and updated .gitignore

README.md, after:

# The Multilingual Quantitative Biologist

This repository contains the source code for the **The Multilingual Quantitative Biologist**.

![cover image](graphics/CMEE_Fungus.jpg)

All code in this book is computer platform (Mac, Linux or PC) independent.

The code was written in and tested with R 3.xx and Python 3.xx, though older language versions (including R 2.xx and Python 2.7) should work in most cases.

See [Index.ipynb](http://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/mhasoba/TheMulQuaBio/blob/master/notebooks/Index.ipynb) for a table of contents of the chapters (all jupyter notebooks).

## License

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License.](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/)

===
## For Contributors/Co-authors:

* Note that the old materials, written in LaTeX, are no in the `archived` directory.
* The solutions to the exercises are in a separate, [private git repo](https://bitbucket.org/mhasoba/themulquabio_sols) that students do not have access to. Ask Samraat (mhasoba@gmail.com) if you need access to that repository.
* The `results` directory will be populated only when scripts are run, but these are not version controlled (all files in this directory under `.gitignore`).
